# Create table in PostgreSQL

Goal of this tutorial is to introduce you to basic concepts of create table using simple business scenario
* Create simple tables with basic data types
*	Create basic constraints primary key, foreign key and check constraint

## Business scenario
A company employees John Smith, Mary Smith, Arnold Jackson and Jeffery Westman they are identified by SSN and employee id.  John works in Sales, Mary works in Research and Arnold and Jeffery work in Accounting. There are other departments that do not have employees at current time also there are employees that are not associated to departments.  All departments have unique department number associated and is autogenerated when a new department is added. The current payroll system captures salary history of all employees and all salaries are greater than 1000 dollars.

Analyzing above scenario using nouns to identify tables and verbs to identify relationships between tables. Below are  identified tables and fields.  


  - Employee (This table captures information of employees working at
    the company)
    
      - Employee Id – number, auto generate, Primary Key, Unique and not
        null
    
      - Employee SSN – 10 character, unique and not null
    
      - Employee First Name – 35 characters and not null
    
      - Employee Last Name -- 50 characters and not null
    
      - Employee Start Date – date and not null
    
      - Employee Termination Date – date nullable

  - Department (This table captures information of department in the
    company)
    
      - Department Id – number auto generate, Primary Key, Unique and
        not null
    
      - Department Name – 50 characters and not null

  - Employee Department Association (This tables capture association
    information between employee and department, in short when and which
    employee worked or is working in the department)
    
      - Employee Id – number, Primary Key, not null, Reference from
        employee table
    
      - Department Number – number, Primary Key, not null, Reference
        from department table
    
      - Employee Department Start Date -- date and not null
    
      - Employee Department End Date -- date nullable

  - Employee Salary History (This table captures employee salary history
    over time)
    
      - Employee Id – number, Primary Key, not null, Reference
    
      - Employee Salary Start Date – date, Primary Key, and not null
    
      - Employee Salary amount – number and not null, and value greater
        than 1000
    
      - Employee End Date -- date nullable
    
 Let's get started. --- need button for ne
