Enumerated types give you the ability to define a set of values that will be 
stored in the column, without the overhead of setting up a separate lookup 
table.

In our example, we've decided to use an enum type to denote how events are 
conducted. You can think of dropdown lists or anything 

### Using the enum type

The syntax for declaring enums is a little different, and consists of:

1. The `CREATE TYPE` statement, and
2. Specifying the name of the created enum type in the table definition

Let's review what we did for the `event` table:

```
CREATE TYPE event_mode AS ENUM ('Virtual', 'In-person');

CREATE TABLE event (
    id INTEGER PRIMARY KEY GENERATED BY DEFAULT AS IDENTITY,
    name TEXT NOT NULL,
    event_dt tstzrange NOT NULL,
    mode event_mode NOT NULL
);
```

We've indicated that the `mode` field will store either 'In-person' or 'Virtual'.

If we try to add a record with a `mode` value that isn't included in the 
`event_mode` enum set, we get an error:

```
INSERT INTO event (name, event_dt, mode)
VALUES ('New Event', 
        tstzrange('2019-12-21 12:00:00 EST', '2019-12-21 17:00:00 EST', '[)'),
        'In person'        
);
```

 >ERROR: invalid input value for enum event_mode: "In person"

Notice that the only thing wrong is that `'In person'` is missing the `-`. 
You'll also get the same error if you try it with `'IN-PERSON'`. In a way, 
enums kind of function as constraints and can help ensure you have clean data.

### Enum or reference table?

In relational database design, it's common to have reference or "lookup" tables
 that contain a list of codes or values that are used in other tables. In our business scenario, we could actually have a separate `event_mode` table that the `event` table could reference.

While it might be nice to not have to deal with the "overhead" of having 
separate lookup tables, you do lose a little bit of flexibility if you ever 
need to change an enum's list of values. For example, according to the 
[official docs](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/datatype-enum.html#id-1.5.7.15.8),
 "existing values cannot be removed from an enum type, not can the sort 
 ordering of such values be changed, short of dropping and re-creating the enum type." On the other hand, creating, updating, or deleting values from lookup tables is more straightforward.

Enums might be better suited to a set or list of values that you're sure will 
never change. Even so, using enums versus reference tables could also come down
 to just a matter of preference.

### Links

[postgresql.org: Enumerated Types](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/datatype-enum.html)  
[postgresql.org: Enum Support Functions](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/functions-enum.html)
